hey guys doug Hollen here and this this
particular video I'm dedicating to those
that want to do some barefoot squatting
or dead lifting or even pushing a sled
in the parking lot barefoot because
they're finding out how healthy it is
for them I do almost the vast majority
of all my squads Dead's and pushing
except for the most extreme temperatures
in winter barefoot and I have my whole
family doing the same now I've been a
practicing reflexologist for the last 13
years and I have worked on thousands of
people's feet and plantar fasciitis
seems to be one of the biggest problems
that we're seeing coming up through the
ranks of issues health issues with
people's feet and for those of you don't
know what plantar fasciitis is it's a
lot of painting on the bottom of the
foot usually in the transverse arch or
up to the calcaneus where you'll see a
spur usually development but anyways I
have my my theory of why this takes
place and has been proved to be pretty
true lately the shoes that we wear today
people are buying more and more rigid
shoes because of their deadlifts and
because of their squatting they feel
rigid is better than a soft shoe and
when you're going to buy the shoe you
put your foot in this metal plate you're
usually sitting down and when you're sit
down you put your foot and metal crate
them to measure it we call that the
resting state so the foot is actually
sitting just still not doing anything
it's not really expanded in any way or
form but then we go ahead and we take a
step down we bend at the knee and we put
load on that foot now we call that the
working state and the foot actually
spreads apart so resting stayed close
working state it spreads apart and it
can be as much as a half inch to an inch
depending on a person's foot so you can
imagine you you buy a shoe you stick
your foot and it feels comfortable but
then you start working out that foot
swells up blood starts getting in there
and what ends up happening is there's no
room for the five metatarsal heads at
the top of your foot there so the five
minute or so heads can
I move and so they end up banging
together they actually just get crushed
and so they have to either move planner
or door sleep so the bones can get out
of the way right this causes
inflammation also causes a Titan of the
tissue or the fasciae that's that lies
around the muscle so what we recommend
doing is and i'm going to show you here
on the board is understanding how to
make that flexible again how to make the
fasciae more fluid in nature so it's not
so tight it's not these micro tears are
not happening in the tissue itself and
in the explanation that I like to give
on the board here is the spine and the
foot are very similar in nature now as
we know that the foot has 26 bones in it
right you have seven tarsals five
metatarsals and 14 flanges are also know
the Fae lynxes the spine tube has 26
bones all right you've got seven
cervical 12 thoracic five lumbar the
sacrum Cox of jail these are the bones
of the spine in the foot now the whole
idea of the spine you guys know this
because it isn't an S formation is to
absorb load so every time you jump up
and down that spine acts like a shock
absorber okay and if you have a strong
muscular system that also helps with the
stabilization and the transferring of
load properly throughout the body but
what people do not realize is the foot
does the exact same thing we've heard of
the Arts right high arch medium/large
flat-footed no matter what a person was
born with they still have an arch and
you any any one of us can just go ahead
and take a step forward feel that
cushioning feel that movement right
there usually around the digitorum
brevis is that thicker muscle right
there in the bottom foot just feel it
you can feel it moving up and down that
is absorbing load so now let's say we
decide to get an orthotic and we put it
in that transverse arch or we wear a
real rigid shoe what we've effectively
done is what
we stop the function of this foot from
absorbing load now it's just a stump
just a hard stump that we're standing up
and down and these muscles are not being
exercised at all they're not exercising
they're not articulating they're not
moving I think that's why the Indians
had it so good then we're a thin
moccasin over the foot so if they walked
up and down hillsides that foot would
move around like our hand does it would
open up those heads of the bones would
open up that blood flow go right up to
the tips of their toes but they were
protected for maybe cut on a rock or a
spur or something like that so a tight
shoe we're going to lose the mobility
we're going to lose the energy that's
needed for building muscles in our faith
they will grow they get strong okay so
what I recommend is trying to squat
barefoot then let the barefoot or run
barefoot as much as you possibly can now
that's winter here obviously we're not
going to go out on the ice with our bare
feet not good but as much barefoot work
as we possibly can do then we'll start
to see a lessening of this fasciitis and
we'll start to see the improvement of
your squats go up your strength will go
up and you know what the sensory nerves
on the bottom of your feet right the
epidermis being in contact with the
floor actually improves balance shoes
take away balance bare feet in contact
with surface improves where you're at
your awareness not only just muscular
awareness but your entire autonomic
nervous system becomes more aware of
where your positioning yourself in your
exercises so this is just my opinion
give it a shot hopefully you never go
and get a cortisone shot for something
like that but you know try to try to
work it out yourself see a reflexologist
to and do this along with your weight
lifting and I hope that improves your
life and maybe this maybe this tip you
can share with somebody else